What are key principles for student-centered learning?
MindEdge has identified seven principles for improved student outcomes.
1. Place the student at the center of the learning experience.
Focus on supporting and empowering the student in master- ing the skills and knowledge in a given field of study.
Shift from the traditional "sage on the stage" approach for instructors to one built around coaching and advising.
Students who are engaged, learn. Students who are challenged by interesting learning experiences, learn.
2. Leverage existing knowledge and skills. Today's students often have prior subject knowledge.
Whenever possible capitalize on this foundation, valuing and extending it.
3. Respect the learner's time.
A well-constructed learning experience lets students know what is expected of them,
and focuses assignments and assessments on the learning objectives outlined at the start of the course.
Time is precious -- avoid the extraneous or off-topic.  Let students learn at their own pace.
4. Employ diagnostic assessments to ascertain gaps in knowledge.
Assessing prior student knowledge, and identifying gaps, is a key. Diagnostic assessments can determine what
should be emphasized, and what can be given a more cursory review.
5. Offer varied learning experiences.
Variety matters: it keeps learners engaged. Offer numerous ways for students to learn -- including video, audio,
infographics, interactives, assessments, and games.
6. Provide needed scaffolding and practice for learners. Not everyone "gets it" immediately, so offer deeper levels
of instruction for students who may struggle with new concepts.
Whole-Part-Whole learning and adaptive learning are ways to integrate scaffolding and support into instruction.
7. Measure progress and mastery of learning objectives.
At every phase of learning, assess student progress. Ask students to demonstrate their mastery of material by
synthesizing answers to higher-order questions.
These seven principles can be applied in all forms of learning -- classroom, blended, and online --
and can provide a useful framework for developing and designing effective learning experiences.